---
layout: post
title: "CTREE and TIER Meetings"
author: "Simon Halliday"
output: github_document
tags: [Economics, Behavioral Economics, Social Preferences, Self-interest, Reproducibility, TIER, CTREE]
---

I have been fortunate to attend a couple of conferences and meetings
recently and to present work in progress as well as to meet with people
in diverse fields – outside of economics – to hear about what other
folks are doing in teaching quantitative courses, data analysis, and
research reproducibility.

## CTREE

The [Conference for Teaching and Research in Economic
Education](https://www.aeaweb.org/about-aea/committees/economic-education/ctree/2019)
(CTREE) was held in St. Louis Missouri. I presented in two sessions and
also served as a discussant.

  - Presentation 1: [Behavioral Economics in the
    Classroom](https://www.dropbox.com/s/86m7klcdqmwfkpp/behavioral_econ_classroom.pptx?dl=0)
  - Presentation 2: [Teaching Social
    Preferences](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1mGwR06fCDN-GxvlzdxoOiRcAeNO1dGc_)
  - Presentation 3 (co-author presented): [Does Economics make you
    selfish?](https://www.dropbox.com/s/y8247ivyzov27cf/Does_economics_make_you_selfish_.pdf?dl=0)

With respect to my presentations, for the first presentation, I was
participating in a panel organized by [Mark
Maier](https://www.glendale.edu/Home/Components/StaffDirectory/StaffDirectory/2166/7073?alpha=M)
of Glendale Community College relating to a new PBS Series “Hacking Your
Mind” produced by Carl Byker. Carl presented some clips from the
upcoming series and three of us presented some ideas about what we teach
in behavioral economics classes at different places: me at Smith
College, [Marcelo
Clerici-Arias](https://economics.stanford.edu/people/marcelo-clerici-arias)
at Stanford, and [Sheryl
Ball](https://econ.vt.edu/content/dam/econ_vt_edu/people/faculty/cvs/Ball_2018_CV.pdf)
at Virginia Tech. My main argument is that, these days, behavioral
economics is truly economics and we should view it as such. Furthermore,
we also need to be clear about what we mean when we talk about the
propositions of behavioral economics as many otherwise well-known people
sometimes present a straw man of conventional economics that we should
not buy into. I don’t have a specific paper relating this presentation
just yet, but I hope to write something in the future along the lines of
the argument I made.

My second presentation was about a set of models I teach in intermediate
microeconomics to teach social preferences or other-regarding
preferences: altruism, difference aversion, reciprocity, trust, and so
on. These types of preferences are often left out of conventional
courses because they are thought of as being too ‘hard’ to teach. Using
standard tools, I show that altruism and inequality aversion can be
taught using standard methods of constrained optimization. I also
demonstrate how a model of externalities with altruism and social
punishment can implement a Pareto-improvement (or even a
Pareto-efficient outcome) over the Pareto-inefficient Nash equilibrium.
Lastly, I presented a model of exchange in an Edgeworth box with
altruism in which the contract curve (Pareto-efficient curve) is
shortened as a consequence of the fellow-feeling the traders feel for
each other (along the lines of a variety of historical and contemporary
examples where people who might others treat their counterparts very
poorly, instead leave something on the table for their fellow traders –
consider, for example, the silent trade involving the Carthaginians as a
historical example of this).

The third presentation was done by my co-author, Sai Mamunuru (PhD
candidate at UMass, Amherst). She, Sam Bowles, Daniele Girardi and I ran
an experiment using an incentivized survey with students in three
different intermediate microeconomics classes at UMass as well as with a
nutrition class. We conducted triple dictator games (with one of three
charities) and trust games (randomly ordered) with the subjects and we
surveyed them for their policy opinions. We repeated the same
incentivized survey later in the semester as a way to see whether
peoples’ behavior changed over time and this allows us to do a
difference-in-differences analysis to deal with selection effects into
economics classes which might otherwise explain selfish behavior by
students. We find that economics students are not, on average, more
selfish than the control nutrition and dietary science students (most of
whom were women). This result contradicts some other research suggesting
that economics students are more selfish than others. We are continuing
to analyze the data and the paper will be submitted later this year.

I served as a discussant for a paper by [Becky
LaFrancois](https://econbus.mines.edu/project/lafrancois-becky/) and
[Scott Houser](https://econbus.mines.edu/project/houser-scott/) (both at
the Colorado School of Mines) who are doing some really great work
looking at how we can include ethical micro-insertions into economics
teaching to make students think about the ethical implications of the
economic models they learn and apply to real-world problems. Given
recent considerations in economics about unethical behavior, this is
timely and important work. I wish their project the best and look
forward to seeing how it develops.

## TIER Executive Meeting and Fellows Meeting

I am on the executive board for [Project TIER](http://projecttier.org)
(Teaching Integrity in Empirical Research) based at Haverford College in
Philadelphia, PA and founded by Richard Ball and Norm Medeiros (see Ball
and Medeiros (2012)). I was previously a [TIER Faculty
Fellow](https://www.projecttier.org/fellowships-and-workshops/tier-faculty-fellowships/2019-20-tier-faculty-fellowships-call-applications/#about-the-fellowships)
and, because of my continued commitment to teaching reproducibility and
integrity in research, I wanted to remain involved with the project. We
submitted an NSF grant toward the end of last fall (the first time we
were doing so) and the grant was rejected – not surprising as this is
standard from what I understand. We learned a lot from that initial
submission and are planning on working on new aspects of the grant
before re-applying to the NSF or other funders. The executive board met
for a day to strategize about the application process and the future of
Project TIER, which was followed by the faculty fellows meeting. On my
second day in Philadelphia, we met with the outgoing TIER fellows
(2018-19) as well as the incoming fellows (2019-20). They are all
impressive folks and I learned important ideas from each of them. Here
are a few points from the presentations (I provide my slides and so on
first).

  - I presented briefly on using TIER-related ideas in my teaching at
    Smith College and the affiliated work I have done as an executive
    board member and former fellow. You can see my slides
    [here](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1wsBLBPHP3opM9C8XQKru60FICk6h4X9g).
    I highlighted work I did that involved TIER such as Dvorak et al.
    (2019), Halliday (2019b), and Halliday (2019a), while speaking about
    the ways I’ve tried to implement TIER in these class and hope to
    change my practice in the future.  

  - [Morton Ann Gernsbacher](http://www.gernsbacherlab.org/) (U
    Wisconsin, Madison) - Morton is a professor of psychology and
    neuroscience and has recently written several papers (see
    Gernsbacher (2018b), Gernsbacher (2018a), and Gernsbacher (2018c)
    all available
    [here](http://www.gernsbacherlab.org/research/open-science-research/papers/))
    on open science in her disciplines. She presented a convincing case
    for pre-registration, arguing that even more exploratory work can be
    pre-registered and that pre-registration (even done privately) acts
    as a commitment device to constrain yourself in ways that are
    beneficial to you as a researcher and to the discipline as a whole.
    I was convinced and think I need to investigate this more in the
    future, though I may not be able to do this with student Honors
    work. In case you need convincing about the benefits of
    pre-registration take a look at this figure from Schäfer and Schwarz
    (2019): ![]({{site_url}}/img/blog_images/../more/prereg_vs_not.jpg)

  - [Nicole
    Janz](https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/politics/people/nicole.janz) (U.
    Nottingham) presented on work she’s been doing to promote
    reproducbility in the classroom and in research. As motivation, she
    shared email correspondence she’s had with researchers asking for
    data and code, in the majority of cases researchers promise the data
    and code but never send it. Nicole also spoke about work she’s
    co-authored with fellow political scientists to work on
    reproducibility and transparency in the discipline, see, for
    example, Gleditsch and Janz (2016) and Janz (2016). She also has
    forthcoming work with other TIER-related folks. Nicole is also a
    [BITSS catalyst](https://www.bitss.org/catalysts/).  

  - [Michael O’Hara](https://www.stlawu.edu/people/michael-ohara)
    (St. Lawrence University) - Michael is a co-author of mine on a
    recent piece for J. Econ Ed (Dvorak et al. (2019), see
    [here](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00220485.2019.1618765)).
    He presented on his experiences teaching reproducibility at
    Hamilton, Colgate and St. Lawrence in econometrics classes. He’s a
    champion for making student work reproducible and you should check
    out what he’s managed to do with his students on the Harvard
    Dataverse.

  - [David Vera](https://sites.google.com/view/davidvera-csufresno/home)
    (Cal State, Fresno) - David presented on his experience reforming
    his statistics and econometrics class at CSF. He had previously
    taught the class using SPSS and didn’t like the outcomes. A few
    years ago he shifted to using R and R Markdown in his classes and
    he’s seen incredible improvements in student outcomes and students
    do not feel that learning R impedes their understanidng (the
    opposite is true).

  - [Megan Becker](https://dornsife.usc.edu/megan-becker/) (USC) - Megan
    teaches IR and works on conflict. She has done a variety of work on
    replication and runs a lab (the [SPEC
    lab](https://dornsife.usc.edu/megan-becker/spec-lab/)) at USC with
    65+ students who are now working on replication activities. She
    explained one project with students where they looked at at famous
    paper by Ross (2004) on the resource curse and they documented a
    replication process (also involving Ross himself so the students
    could ask questions and engage with him). It sounds like an
    eminently fruitful activity from which she and her students benefit
    greatly. She has some great ideas about mentoring undergraduate
    students in ongoing research and setting up a lab in political
    science research.

  - [Chris
    Conway](https://www.wm.edu/as/psych-sciences/facultydirectory/conway_c.php)
    (Fordham U, previously William & Mary) - Chris is a psychologist who
    works in mental health and he is very interested in the replication
    crisis psychology and what kinds of plans we as researchers can
    develop to ensure that our research work more broadly – not just
    data analysis but the broader aspects of reseach practice – are more
    transparent.

  - [Sam Harper](http://samharper.org/) (McGill University) - Sam has
    done some great work already on replicating published research in
    public health and epidemiology. He explained a few of his projects
    and highlighted the ways in which different researchers can produce
    better or worse methods sections in their papers to make replication
    more or less feasible. He demonstrated this with a couple of his own
    papers, highlighting one paper on whether medical marijuana laws
    increase marijuana use (Harper, Strumpf, and Kaufman (2012)) and
    another on whether 4/20 Day affects traffic accidents (Harper and
    Palayew (2019)). Sam’s work is available on the Harvard Dataverse
    [here](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/samharper). He has
    also developed a course on reproducible research for medical
    professionals and is engaged in thinking about what better
    reproducibility would look like in medical research.

  - [Ben
    Marwick](https://anthropology.washington.edu/people/ben-marwick)
    (Washington U) - Ben is an archaeologist with a strong interest in
    research transparency in anthropology and archaeology (who knew this
    was a thing?). He has done some pretty phenomenal work on authoring
    his own work in R Markdown, writing packages for papers he’s
    written, and collaborating with folks to put together the
    [`rrtools`](https://github.com/benmarwick/rrtools) package that
    helps to make research reproducible (see Marwick (2019), Marwick,
    Boettiger, and Mullen (2018)). I would advise you to read a piece he
    wrote for [The Conversation](https://theconversation.com) a few
    years ago, [“How computers broke
    science”](https://theconversation.com/how-computers-broke-science-and-what-we-can-do-to-fix-it-49938).
    I hope to employ the language he highlights about papers being the
    “advertisement” for scholarship, but the scholarship itself is
    what goes on in the process of producing that advertisement. Do also
    consider taking a look at the University of Washington’s page on
    [reproducibility](https://guides.lib.uw.edu/research/reproducibility).

## References

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-ballmed2012">

Ball, Richard, and Norm Medeiros. 2012. “Teaching Integrity in Empirical
Research: A Protocol for Documenting Data Management and Analysis.” *The
Journal of Economic Education* 43 (2): 182–89.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00220485.2012.659647>.

</div>

<div id="ref-halliday2019efficient">

Dvorak, Tomas, Simon D. Halliday, Michael O’Hara, and Aaron Swoboda.
2019. “Efficient Empiricism: Streamlining Teaching, Research, and
Learning in Empirical Courses.” *The Journal of Economic Education* 0
(0). Routledge: 1–16. <https://doi.org/10.1080/00220485.2019.1618765>.

</div>

<div id="ref-gernsbacher2018rewarding">

Gernsbacher, Morton Ann. 2018a. “Rewarding Research Transparency.”
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences* 22 (11). Elsevier: 953–56.

</div>

<div id="ref-gernsbacher2018three">

———. 2018b. “Three Ways to Make Replication Mainstream.” *Behavioral and
Brain Sciences* 41. Cambridge University Press: e129.
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X1800064X>.

</div>

<div id="ref-gernsbacher2018writing">

———. 2018c. “Writing Empirical Articles: Transparency, Reproducibility,
Clarity, and Memorability.” *Advances in Methods and Practices in
Psychological Science* 1 (3). SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles,
CA: 403–14.

</div>

<div id="ref-janz2016replication">

Gleditsch, Nils Petter, and Nicole Janz. 2016. “Replication in
International Relations.” *International Studies Perspectives* 17 (4):
361–66. <https://doi.org/10.1093/isp/ekv003>.

</div>

<div id="ref-halliday2019data">

Halliday, Simon D. 2019a. “Data Literacy for Economic Development.” *The
Journal of Economic Education* 0 (0). Routledge: forthcoming.

</div>

<div id="ref-halliday2019ethics">

———. 2019b. “Promoting an Ethical Economics Classroom Through
Partnership.” *International Journal for Students as Partners* 3 (1):
182–89. <https://doi.org/10.15173/ijsap.v3i1.3623>.

</div>

<div id="ref-harper2019annual">

Harper, Sam, and Adam Palayew. 2019. “The Annual Cannabis Holiday and
Fatal Traffic Crashes.” *Injury Prevention*. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd,
injuryprev–2018.

</div>

<div id="ref-harper2012marijuana">

Harper, Sam, Erin C. Strumpf, and Jay S. Kaufman. 2012. “Do Medical
Marijuana Laws Increase Marijuana Use? Replication Study and Extension.”
*Annals of Epidemiology* 22 (3): 207–12.
<https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annepidem.2011.12.002>.

</div>

<div id="ref-janz2016bridging">

Janz, Nicole. 2016. “Bringing the Gold Standard into the Classroom:
Replication in University Teaching.” *International Studies
Perspectives* 17 (4): 392–407. <https://doi.org/10.1111/insp.12104>.

</div>

<div id="ref-marwick2018rrtools">

Marwick, Ben. 2019. *Rrtools: Creates a Reproducible Research
Compendium*. <https://github.com/benmarwick/rrtools>.

</div>

<div id="ref-marwick2018packaging">

Marwick, Ben, Carl Boettiger, and Lincoln Mullen. 2018. “Packaging Data
Analytical Work Reproducibly Using R (and Friends).” *The American
Statistician* 72 (1). Taylor & Francis: 80–88.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1375986>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ross2004we">

Ross, Michael L. 2004. “What Do We Know About Natural Resources and
Civil War?” *Journal of Peace Research* 41 (3). Sage Publications Sage
CA: Thousand Oaks, CA: 337–56.

</div>

<div id="ref-schaferschwarz2019meaning">

Schäfer, Thomas, and Marcus A. Schwarz. 2019. “The Meaningfulness of
Effect Sizes in Psychological Research: Differences Between
Sub-Disciplines and the Impact of Potential Biases.” *Frontiers in
Psychology* 10: 813. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00813>.

</div>

</div>
